The Science Fiction Radio Show A commentary on science fiction today Presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
This is David Cruz Daryl Lane And David Carson
The subject of this show is science fiction music, including that of science
fiction motion pictures and other sources. The importance of music to movies, I
think, is an obvious thing. A good musical score can do a number of things for a
movie. It can create a mood for the entire picture. It can dramatize the actions
of a particular scene. It can also rouse the emotions of the audience. With
science fiction movies, I think this is true also, but with another dimension to
it. The situations and moods of a science fiction movie might be of a very
different nature. You might have, for instance, a meeting with a race of aliens.
The awesomeness of a space battle. The discovery of a new planet. Situations or
moods that might take something a little different, a little special. And I
think it requires a special breed of composer to accomplish this. But the best
science fiction music, I think, can evoke what good science fiction itself
evokes, a sense of wonder and excitement. Yeah.
.
¶¶
¶¶ That was the main theme from Star Wars. Much of the music used in science
fiction movies has its roots in classical music. One of the more popular and
well-known works of this type is the suite for large orchestra by Gustav Holst
called The Planets. It was written between 1914 and 1918. And it contains a
series of pieces on each planet that was known at that time, Mars through
Neptune, and gives a musical impression of each one. During the filming of Star
Wars, they used the music from Holst's The Planets to use as background music
behind the scenes while they were being roughly edited together. They used this
music in order to give the director and crew a sense of what the music was going
to be like when the picture was completed. They liked the music so much that
when they had the original score written, they had it written with the same type
of orchestration and theme that was in The Planets. As an example now of what
this is like, and maybe you could compare it to what the Star Wars theme was
like, let's listen to Mars, The Bringer of War, from Gustav Holst's The Planets.
This is Bernard Ehrman conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra. The Planets
The Planets
The Planets The Planets The Planets The Planets The Planets The Planets The
Planets
The Planets
The Planets The Planets
there. They're more like tone poems that evoke particular moods. For instance,
Mars, the bringer of war, evokes the mechanized horrors of modern warfare, since
in his astrological aspect, Mars is the god of war. Indeed, as Harry Halbrack
said, the planets belongs to our time as genuine space music. And of course, who
can forget the unique blend of classical music with science fiction and probably
one of the greatest science fiction movies of all time, 2001.
So,
so,
so, so,
just as in Star Wars, the people producing 2001 used classical music behind
their movie as they were editing it together. The difference here is being that
they liked the music so much that they used it in the movie. And what they had
to do was to, to junk an entire score that had been composed by Alex North. And
it was not used in the movie because this, this classical background was so
successful. The piece you just heard, which is probably the most famous theme
from the movie 2001, is in actuality a piece from a classical composition called
Alsosprak Zarathustra, written by Richard Strauss in 1896. It's from a long tone
poem. This is just the fanfare from that piece. Another piece used in the film
was written by Richard's father, Johan, and it is one of the most famous of the
Viennese waltzes, the Blue Danube, used in the incredible, the and unforgettable
scene of the rocket ship approaching the space station in Earth orbit.
As the 1950s began, we were treated to a number of low budget science fiction
films. One of them in particular, Rocket Ship XM, had music by a rather well
known classical composer, Frodo Grofe, the composer of the Grand Canyon Suite.
Grofe was noted for his suites. He wrote many of them. His musical method was
very simple. If you want to evoke the sound of a gun, you would fire a gun,
which he did in his, one of his compositions. If you wanted the sound of a fire
engine, you would record a fire engine. So his music is full of old typewriters
clacking, earthquakes going off, fog horns bellowing, cable car bells ringing.
And that kind of simple basic method, I think, is appropriate, particularly
appropriate for the, for a dramatic science fiction movie, which Rocket Ship XM
was. In 1950, producer Robert Lippert decided to approach Grofe and try to get
him to compose the music for the film. Grofe did not particularly want to be
involved with low budget science fiction films, which were not exactly
considered the best by critics at that time. And he agreed only to write the
basic themes for the music. The actual composition of the orchestration was done
by Albert Glasser. The following is a sampling of some of the pieces from Rocket
Ship XM, including a solo by a unique instrument, the theremin.
Music, показывают by the science fiction arts and devaluetas said therein. Music
is Sir Root of theruck Blind and helps the engineering of another master's
serenacaranter. Music is still happy that they make their careers, the team of a
certain students have chosen goal to view the class. Music is still happy that
everyone has done any kind of abuse. Music is wowed as he thus having taken a
position of allосize In 1935 and is also proud to meet the son of the white
tarnatown. The same urgently やesti Being joined every single part of your life,
gig, he записaled黒dag Bueno to our upperッグ.
The other tip is suspiciously, who supports him from the archive workshop where
he hasмо gefährdened at it from the core to grown,
The End
The End The End
The End The End The End The End The End The End
The End
The End The End The End
The End The End
The End
The End The End The End The End The End
The End The End
The End
The End The End The End The End The End
The End The End
The End